Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Decent. I'm your host, Ricardo Lob. And today I'm
here with a very special guest, returned guest, Doctor
Philip Ball. In our first interview, we talked about
his Book of Minds and I'm leaving a link
with in the description of this one. And today
we're talking about his latest book, How Life Works.
A user's guide to the new biology. So, Doctor
Ball, welcome back to the show. It's always a
huge pleasure to everyone.
Thanks for having me back, right? It's very nice.
So, since we're talking about life today, let me
perhaps start with what I would think is a
basic question, but perhaps one of the most complicated
ones. So what is life? I mean, is there
any approach in, for example, physics or chemistry for
us to be able to differentiate any sort of
criteria to differentiate the organic from the organic living
things, from nonliving things or not?
Well, if there is no one has agreed on
what that is. So I think it's fair to
say that at the moment, there is no generally
agreed definition of what life is, um which is
amazing when you think about it, you know, it
seems a, such a fundamental thing and such a,
a kind of an obvious thing that surrounds us,
but we cannot say scientifically exactly what it is
that distinguishes a living thing from a nonliving thing.
Um So the, the, the approach I take in
my book, I mean, fortunately I don't have to
answer that question. Although II I can't steer entirely
away from it. But I'm talking about in the
book about those things that we know are alive
and particularly about how our biology works. But in
looking at that one can't avoid that more general
question. What is it that distinguishes, you know, these
living things? And one of the things that I
suggest in the book is in contrast to what,
what, what often happens is that you get these
lists of, you know, what living things should uh
require these criteria. So they should be, um you
know, self reproducing or self replicating. They should have
metabolism, you know, maybe there's homeostasis and so on.
All of those things, certainly properties that we find
in living things. But the problem with lists like
that is that we almost inevitably tend to find
that there are systems that have at least some
of those properties that we don't regard as living
things like tornadoes or, you know, things in the,
the nonliving world that have a kind of self
organizing capacity, but that we wouldn't regard as alive.
And then perhaps there are some things that living
things do that it, it, it seemed to be
excluded from a list like that. And it seems
clear that there are these very few systems, in
particular viruses that seem to be right on the
threshold of life and there's no consensus about whether
viruses are actually living systems or not. So, what
I, um, end up doing in, in the book
is to suggest that although this shouldn't be an
absolute criterion of life, I think a more fruitful
way to think about what it is that living
systems have that makes them different from nonliving is
a notion called agency. And maybe we'll, you know,
get on to uh explore that idea in, in,
in more detail later. But, uh you know, in
a nutshell agency, I it seems to me it
captures intuitively what we see living things do, which
is that they have some capacity to change their
environment and change themselves most crucially in order to
achieve some particular goal, they have goals and purposes
and that's not something that we see in nonliving
systems, even complex ones like tornadoes. So it's that
notion of goal directed that I think lies at
the heart of life and of biology and that
we'll see sort of coming up again and again,
as we try to understand what makes life work,
so whether we will come back to agency, but
I guess that perhaps there, you might have been
partially influenced by Doctor Kevin Mitchell through his book
Free Agents or something like that or not.
I, I absolutely Dr Drew on, on Kevin's work,
his book Free Agents, which looks at what this
notion might mean and how it, uh, evolved throughout
time. It's, it's a fabulous, um, Kevin and I
realized actually that we were both thinking about agency,
you know, at the same time, independently of, of,
of one another. Kevin. I, you know, don't hesitate
to say Kevin has thought about this more deeply
than I have and goes into this question more
deeply than I have in his book. So it
was a fabulous resource to me. But, but, you
know, the two of us, um we were thinking
that this notion of agency seems to have some
currency and we weren't alone either. There are many
other uh biologists and others philosophers of biology who
are starting to think uh in terms of a
notion of agency and are thinking, you know, we
really need to try to pin this down and
ideally to get a theory of agency in order
to understand life. So I think both of us
are actually part of a broader movement that's going
on. The controversial one I should say within biology
to get to grips with this notion of agency.
But related to my first question, does it really
matter or do we really need to have a
proper universal consensual definition of life, I mean, because
wasn't it the case that we were able to
learn things about how genes work and how genes
relate to other molecules in our body and stuff
like that and things about different kinds of organisms
without having a proper universal definition of what a
gene or what the species is. And those are
just two examples, I guess.
Yeah. Well, I think it depends on the questions
you want to ask. So, if you're a biologist
wanting to understand how the human body works or
how bacteria work or how plants work or whatever,
then you don't have to wrestle with that question
because, you know, you know, the, the, the subject
of your, um uh of your investigations, you know,
that it's, uh, it makes it, that it's meaningful
and has always been meaningful to think of it
as being alive as having this property. So you
don't have to think about it more than that.
I mean, I, I find that it's a little
bit analogous to, uh in quantum mechanics, how plenty
of people, you know, most physicists um, who use
quantum mechanics don't have to think about what it
actually means, which again is a question that actually
we don't have any consensus about they just get
on and do, do the work. Um So, you
know, you can work this way in biology. But
if you're someone like an astrobiologist who is searching
for life on other worlds, then you have to
have some sort of criterion for what you're looking
for. Um And so, you know, there it really
does become important to really try to get to
grips with. Well, what is it that's characteristic of
what we would recognize as a living thing, you
know, and how can we look for that in,
in other worlds? And then you start to get
into questions. I mean, going back to the, the
definition that uh James Lovelock in the 19 sixties
came up with for the um the Mars Viking,
uh nasa's Viking missions, the Lander missions uh where
they were wanting to, you know, analyze the Martian
soil and see if there were signs of life
and they needed to know what they were looking
for. And Jim Lovelock suggested that a good criterion
would be to look for quite extreme chemical disequilibrium,
which means mixtures of chemicals that normally wouldn't be
found, wouldn't be stable in that mixture, they would
react and, you know, reach some kind of equilibrium
system. Um But if you see a strong disequilibrium
and that's what we see on the earth, that's
what we see in our atmosphere, in particular, for
example, a mixture of uh of lots of oxygen
which is very rare molecule and uh and methane
and other uh molecules like that, that has just
clearly been sustained, you know, for a long period
of time and hasn't settled down into an equilibrium
that is being driven by the eco by the,
the biosphere. Um And so that was, this was
Jim's idea back in the 19 sixties. Um That,
that's maybe what we should look for. We should
look for chemical disequilibrium. But that's not enough. You
know, we recognize that's not enough because there are
geological processes that can create that sort of disequilibrium
over long periods. So that's a start for astrobiologists.
But again, you know, it's not enough and that's
the big challenge they now face now that we're
able to go to other worlds and look at
the atmospheres of other planets, even outside our solar
system. What are we looking for if we're looking
for life?
Mhm uh But of course, since life is such
a complicated subject to talk about many times, we
people not just lay people, but even sometimes even
the scientists themselves resort to metaphors, like for example,
talking about living systems as machines, as computers or
something along those lines. And of course, throughout history,
people have thought about life in different ways and
through different method, metaphors, do you think that these
metaphors might be useful in some way or are
they just problematic? And if possible, we should just
try to drop them because of the wrong ideas
that they convey?
Well, II, I think that metaphors are essential, they're
essential in science. And actually, I think they're essential
in language generally, you know, we speak in terms
of metaphors. Um So they, they are uh a
fundamental aspect of our thinking. Um So there's no
getting away from them and they are very useful
and, you know, even metaphors um that, you know,
will once used hundreds of years ago to understand
maybe life or to understand complex systems that uh
we now regard maybe as quite naive, they were
still useful in their time. I think the problem
I I perceive with some of these metaphors is
that there is no mechanism for knowing when to
dump them, when to get rid of them, recognizing
when they are no longer useful. And you know,
it struck me uh in thinking about this, particularly
in terms of life that um i it's kind
of peculiar that science is in this position, we
have a mechanism uh in theory, at least anyway,
a mechanism for getting rid of theories that are
no longer useful because, you know, we test them
against experiment. And if the theory and the experiment
conflict, often enough, we start to think maybe the
theory needs changing. So that's fine. There's nothing like
that with me. And so metaphors can stick around
and often do longer than they're welcome and longer
than they're useful. And I think the idea that
living organisms are kind of machines to, to my
mind, that seems to be one of these metaphors
that has stuck around for too long. It's no
longer helpful to think about it that way. Um
Or rather perhaps I should say, because I think
it is nuanced. I think there are situations certainly
there are situations in biology where thinking of an
a component of a biological system like a protein,
for example, as a kind of machine that makes
absolute sense. And some of them look rema and
a few of them look remarkably light machines. So
you have the bacteria, the bacterial flagellum, for example,
which is a protein sort of assembly that allows
the uh these flagella, these sort of whip like
appendages to spin round and let some bacteria swim.
It looks just like a rotary motor in all
sorts of ways. And so it makes sense to
talk about it in that machine like way. But
when we think about how the whole organism works,
the more closely we think about that, the less
and less it looks like any sort of machine
that we have ever made, it works in quite
different ways. And so to, to my mind, the
machine metaphor then starts to become not just uh
um uh inappropriate but actually potentially misleading. Um And
that, you know, that's being very controversial. There are
some people who feel that actually thinking about us
as machines that that's really a way of saying
I'm just a materialist ID. I don't think there's
any sort of mystical, you know, vital spirit that's
animating us. It's just atoms doing stuff. And, you
know, that's actually, that's, I'm happy with that materialistic
position myself. I'm happy to say that, you know,
at the root of it all we, if we
look far enough down, all we see is atoms
interacting, there's nothing mysterious uh beyond that. That's fine.
But my problem is that w that when we
start to look at the higher levels of how
living systems work, they're not machine like, so it's
not a helpful metaphor anymore. So, one of the
things I wanted to try to do in my
book is to think, well, what are the more
useful metaphors that, you know, we now might want
to call on in order to understand these things?
Um And more broadly than that, what is the
more useful kind of narrative we want to tell
about how life works rather than the conventional narrative.
It seems to me that we certainly, it's the
one that we tend to hear about in the
popular sphere, which is that I I it all,
it's all encoded in some sense in our DNA,
in our genome and life. It is simply in
e in essence, it's simply a readout of that
information in the genome. Um So it's a computational
metaphor. And again, you, there is some value for
a computational metaphor of DNA. But if you think
that is going to answer the question of what
life is and how it works, then I'm afraid,
I think you're gonna be mistaken.
So one of the alternatives uh in terms of
the ways we could think about life that you
present in your book is of, of living things
as generators of meaning. What does that mean? Exactly.
Right. That comes again down to this notion that
living things have goals and purposes. Um, AND, you
know, it, it's, it's kind of strange to me
that this should be a controversial thing to, um,
uh, to, to, to, to say because we have
no, I think most people would have no argument
with the fact that we have goals, you know,
that you, that you had a goal in setting
up this, this, this call today, you know, everything
we do, we have some sort of goal that
uh that, that motivates us. We don't always perhaps
quite know or articulate what those are, but we
do and we can see those, we can certainly
see those in other animals. You know, I think
most people would think dogs have some sort of
goal, you know, chimpanzees have some sort of goal.
So it's not unique to us. Um And then
it, it, it doesn't seem a big stretch to
suggest that actually some kind of goal directed us
goes, you know, at least long way, sort of
uh through, I should say rather than down, I
think, but through the uh the living world, um
to, in some sense, some plants have goals. And
actually I think it makes sense to see every
living thing down to single celled bacteria as in
some sense, having goals that they themselves determine in
some sense. That doesn't mean to say that bacteria
thinking, what, what should I do now? Of course,
but there is some goal directed us to it.
So in order to achieve those goals, what uh
what any living system has to do, it is
constantly, it's in some environment, it is constantly bombarded.
If you like with information or with things happening,
things coming from that environment, you know how warm
it is, what molecules are around, what other creatures
are around and so on. You know, living systems
have sensory systems in order to take in that
information. But they don't want to take it all
in, it's too much and most of that information
or a lot of that information is simply not
useful to it. So, you know, for us, I
mean, the for example, the world, you know, is
also saturated with ultraviolet and infrared light that we
got our visual system doesn't register that of some
creatures does, but ours doesn't. So that's information that
if you like evolution has sort of found, you
know, is not sufficiently useful to us to develop
a sensory system to make use of it. So,
you know, we, we ignore it and we don't
even sort of recognize it in daily life, but
it's absolutely out there. So what that really means
is that there is some information out there that
does not have meaning for us. Um It does
not have value for us, value in the sense
of being helpful to us in order to attain
our goals. And this is what uh what, what
nature is constantly doing for every organism. There are,
there are choices being made that essentially have been
made by evolution, what matters in the environment, what
do I have to attain end to and what
can I ignore? And that's really what I mean
by meaning here. So it's not meaning in some,
any sort of deep metaphysical sense of, you know,
what's meaningful in my life. It is, it is
meaning in terms of each organism as an agent,
making, in a sense, making value judgments about the
information it receives this matters and this doesn't, I'll
attend to this and I won't attend to that.
That's really something that um again is quite distinctive
to life because it, it, it really is a
kind of judgment of, you know, what matters and
what doesn't something that it's very hard to see.
How could, you know, you could even have a
sense of that in nonliving systems. So that's what
I mean by meaning. And I suggest in the
book that actually that is one way of thinking
about what life is. Life is a generator of
meaning for the agents, the organisms that are living.
Mhm. Yeah. You know, I guess that some of
the issues that some people might have, perhaps some
of the old school philosophers of biology and evolutionary
biologists with the use of words like meaning and
even perhaps in some contexts, purpose and words like
that is that perhaps the would have a reaction
where they would think. Oh, so now we're getting
into the religious realm or something like that? Are
you saying that we are here for a reason
that we have purposes that are imbued into us
as organisms as living things, stuff like that. And
even sometimes it also gets connected to ideas like
teleology that life follows a particular path, something like
that. So I guess that maybe at least for
the more old school people, that's why they are
a bit, uh, I mean, they don't tend to
like those kinds of words, I guess because they
associate them with that.
Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. There is a nervousness. I'd say
an allergy, um, amongst some biologists to words like
that purpose and, and, and certainly to meaning. Um,
AND, and also to goals. I, I was at
a meeting, um, in Minnesota a few weeks ago
that was looking at all of these sorts of
questions about, of agency and purpose and there were
biologists of all sorts of stamps and philosophers of
biology there as well. So regular, you know, biologists
from university departments and, um, some of them were
saying one said in particular, you know, the nice
thing about this, this, uh, a meeting like this
is that we can voice these t, you know,
words that are taboo otherwise they clearly felt, you
know, we need these concepts but we're not allowed
to say them and it kind of seems crazy
that we're not. And so there was a relief
there that you could actually talk in these purposes.
Now, some of that I think is, it is
perfectly understandable because if you talk about things like
purposes, um, and, and, and goals, you know, you
could easily see how that could be weaponized really
by creationists and people, you know, interested in intelligent
design. Say, aha. So where does that purpose come
from? It? You know, must have had some divine
source or whatever, but it really doesn't have to,
you can naturalize these ideas. Um And, you know,
I think that's the, that that's part of the
goal that we, that's certainly part of the goal
of getting a theory of agency which has to
include some notion of goal directed us. So, um
you know, I don't think there has to be
anything at all mystical in, in ideas like that.
And I think it's also important to distinguish you
see, when, when, when uh goals and purpose are,
are talked about often for biologists that seems to
imply that evolution itself has some kind of direction,
some kind of, you know, end point that it's
heading towards, that's been a, you know, an old
idea that has sort of haunted evolutionary theory for
a long, long time. Um And there is as
far as we can tell at the moment, there
is absolutely no reason to believe that evolution has
anything like a goal or a purpose, you know,
that it's famously described as a, this kind of
blind search, you know, that, that, um, I mean,
not really a search for anything, it's a, you
know, a blind process that, that comes up with
all these incredible sort of solutions. Um And, you
know, there are some people who actually do ask
whether there's some directionality to evolution. It's not an
unreasonable question to ask. I'm pretty conservative on that
uh question. I, I feel like, well, you know,
at the moment, I don't see any reason to
suppose that that is the case, but that's quite
a different matter from saying the products of evolution,
individual organisms themselves, not only can have goals and
purposes, but that is in their intrinsic nature, that
is what they are about. So there is no
reason to link the two. You can have blind
evolution producing systems, organisms that are goal driven. And
in fact, I think that's exactly what evolution does.
We'll come back to organisms. But since we're also
going to tackle here, at least to some extent,
questions surrounding units and levels of selection in evolutionary
biology because that's one of the biggest questions out
there. Uh Let me start by asking you now
about perhaps the most basic level that some people
talk about that is the level of the gene.
So when it comes to genes, how do you
think about their role and significance in life? And
do you think that attaching words like instruction book
blueprint or code to them is accurate enough or
not?
Uh Well, II, I think it's not uh accurate.
I think it's actually very misleading. You know, we
still have this notion in sort of popular culture
because it's been pushed by uh by biologists of
various sorts that the genome is our instruction book.
Um Once you start to, to look at how
we actually work and what genes do in that
process, it seems to me that it makes no
sense whatsoever. Not just to me actually to inc
I think to a lot of biologists, it makes
no sense what, so to think about it as
an instruction book, it's not clear what that can
possibly mean. You can't look, you know, an, an
instruction book you can sort of read and you
can understand, OK, that this is how I need
to put this thing together. We, there, there, there
is no indication that we will ever be able
to do anything like that from the genome. Not
least because it's clear that not all the information
that is used in a sense to build uh
that the entire organism is simply in the genome.
Um So I don't think that's a, a helpful
way of, of, of looking at the genome. And
in fact, I think it's, um, it, it, it's
an obstructive way and perhaps a dangerously misleading way
to look at it because it lies at the
root of the cultural idea we have of genetic
determinism that, you know, what we are going to
be is determined by our genes, which I, it,
it, it, you know, there are many, many ways
that you can see that, that simply is not
the case. I mean, to state an obvious one,
the way our brains are wired up with its
uh I think 86 billion neurons or something, there's
lots of them. But the point is there are
more of them and more certainly more connections between
them than there are letters in the genome. There's
not enough information there to specify how that's done.
It can bias those connections in certain ways and
clearly does because there are traits, behavioral traits that
we have, that we can correlate with uh what's
in our genome, but it doesn't program how our
brain is going to wire up. So, you know,
that's just one example. So the way I think
it's more helpful, I mean, uh you know, having
said all that, I think it's absolutely um ie
uh essential to make clear that genes are clearly,
they have a, a hugely central role in how
we work. Um And not least because they are
the thing or at least the genome or the
in information within the genome is the thing that
is passed on between generations. So, Genes, as Richard
Dawkins says, genes, I think really do have a
privileged status in evolutionary theory because they are the
thing that is passed between generations. But that doesn't
mean to say they have to be the thing
that uh contains all the information, you know, that
that is needed to put us together because they're,
what are they passed on between, they're passed on
between things that are already alive. They are, you
know, so that they are not, it, it, it's
a little bit like, you know, we, we tend
to say, well, genes, I mean, in fact, uh
Crick and Watson, when they discovered the structure of
DNA in 1953 you know, Jim Watson at least
alleged that they were convinced that this was the
secret of life, this was what life was all
about. Um And yet, you know, that gives rise
to this peculiar notion that um a living system
plus its genes. It is somehow and it's, you
know, a, a living, it's still a living system.
It has to be alive. The gene does, the
genome does nothing by itself. Put DNA in a
beaker, even if you throw all the uh you
know, molecules that you think might be needed to
put a mo to put a system together. It
does nothing. It's an inert molecule unless it's in
a living system. And when it's in a living
system, what it then does is provide resources or
the really the information for resources, in particular, the
information for building the proteins, the enzymes that catalyze
our biochemical processes. But actually, we're also finding and
this is one of the key things, you know,
I wanted to bring out in the book. We're
also finding that there's a, an awful lot else
in our genome besides instructions for making proteins. Um
So, you know, parts of, of, of our DNA,
we've sort of really discovered only over the past
20 or 30 years. How much this is true
that there are parts of DNA that don't encode
proteins, but they do encode these RN A molecules
that uh are like DNA, but they're, they're just
sort of shorter molecules, they're templated on DNA and
they used to be thought of pretty much all
as being um just the messenger that carries the
information for making a protein from the DNA to
the place to the sort of machinery. And I'm
gonna use that term here that um that, that
makes the proteins, but some RN A molecules aren't
like that. They're called non coding RN A molecules
and they do things in their own, right. They
do kind of protein like jobs if, if you
like. So there's, you know, there's more to the
genome than, than protein coding genes. In fact, there
are also bits of the genome that don't encode
proteins, but that are uh somehow involved in switching
genes on. And off and they're dotted all over
the, the, the genome. So the structure and, and
the information that's in the genome is far more
complex than just being a repository for protein coding
genes. Plus a load of stuff that, you know,
doesn't really do anything useful at all. And the,
the uh the key point really is that the
way all that information is used is contextual what
the cell does with. It depends on all sorts
of things like what kind of cell it is.
The way my liver cells use the information in
my DNA is different from the way my skin
cells do, even though it's the same DNA. So
it's contextual. So the cell is integrated information from
outside, even to the extent of deciding if you
like which protein to make from a particular gene.
Because each g protein coding gene doesn't just encode
one protein, it can encode several. And in fact,
on average, it encodes six different ones because the
information there can be sort of taken apart and
stitched together in different ways to make different proteins.
And the cell if you like decides which of
those to make in a particular circumstance. So that's
information coming from outside, even at the level of
reading out a gene which we thought was pretty
sort of autonomous. So that's really what I mean,
that it's really the, the uh our, our genes
and our DNA generally provide the uh uh a
very rich resource that the cell decides what it's
going to, to use for.
Mhm uh And the fact that you mentioned at
a certain point there, that genes or DNA material
just by itself is inert and it needs to
be integrated into a living system to really be
able to do anything. Uh You mentioned there, for
example, how uh genes in, in that are part
of cells in different kinds of tissues or organs.
For example, uh their genes are expressed differently or
produce different proteins depending on the type of tissue
or organ they are part of. So I I
mean, I guess that we have to look across
different scales here to really understand what do because
it's the fact that they are part of a
particular cell that has particular organelles and is receiving
particular kinds of information from the cells around it
and from different parts of the body. But also
that it is part of a specific kind of
tissue in a specific kind of organ. And also
more generally that it is inside an organism that
lives in a particular kind of environment, right? All
of that matters.
Absolutely. So there is no privilege level in that,
in that system at which, you know, essentially life
is happening. And you know, it's certainly not at
the level of the gene. I mean, this is
the the key thing to get across. I think,
you know, genes are the genes are not alive.
By the time you've, if you want to understand
how life works, you absolutely have to, you know,
get down to the level of the gene to
understand an aspect of that problem, but you're not
gonna answer it there because there is nothing alive
at that level. And what really struck me as
I was, you know, trying to find a way
of, of articulating, this is the, the difference between
that picture, which is really a picture about developmental
biology. And you know, how our uh uh day
to day living works, the the difference between that
and the evolutionary picture. And in fact, there are
plenty of people who feel that what we mean
by gene is different. If we're talking about a
bit of DNA that does something in developmental terms.
And if we're talking about this thing that, you
know, uh in conventional evolutionary theory that people like
Richard Dawkins have fantastically explained, gets passed on between
generations. They're not obviously the same thing. There is
actually just as with life, as you say, there
is no consensus uh definition of, of what a
gene actually is. But all of these different ideas
are useful. And it really struck me that in,
in the view, certainly the view, you know, famously
uh popularized brilliantly popularized by Richard Dawkins of, you
know, um the gene centered view of evolution, he,
he requires genes to be essentially like little agents
themselves, all competing amongst each other in a kind
of pool, undifferentiated pool of agents where, you know,
you don't really, you lose sight of the fact
that there are actually organisms uh here. And you
mean, you literally do. So it, the end uh
Richard Dawkins talks about the a paradox of the
fact that they are organisms at all because you've,
you know, why do you need them if all
these genes are, are themselves little agents, sort of
like little organisms competing and doing stuff. So that
view requires us to put all the agency that
is actually in living systems into the genes themselves.
And, you know, then the the organisms themselves just
become kind of passive vehicles that the genes build
in or for their own purposes. So that's a
view that it can be useful for thinking about
evolutionary biology. But is I think profoundly misleading in
terms of thinking about what genes actually are as
material things that contribute to, you know, how cells
and how organisms and tissues work. So that's that,
that's really um the distinction I'd want to make.
And as you say, you know, what a gene
really? Mm does and means um is contextual. It's
using all this other information that's coming from, from
elsewhere. And you know, that's the only way it
can work. It's not entirely a sort of bottom
up process of simply reading out the genome in
order to build the organism. It's the organism is
constantly integrating all sorts of information. And one of
the things that I found most fascinating in researching
this book is how that integration of information happens.
Even at the level of deciding whether to express
that is whether to convert a gene, a given
gene to its protein or not. It integrates all
sorts of information. Uh YOU know, just to come
up with in the end, a binary decision, should
I um turn this gene on or off basically,
should I express it or not? And uh um
you know, that's that it's a complex decision that
involves many different molecules and actually often many different
parts of, of the, of the, of the, of
our DNA um of the chromosome in order to
make that decision. So there, there is a very
complex sort of set of principles that our biochemistry
uses our cells use in order to make that
decision. It's not something that is solely determined by
what the gene itself, what the genome itself contains.
A and one very important thing here I think
is that um is the way we tend to
relate genes to traits of a particular organism, right?
Because we tend to have or most people tend
to have this very simplistic idea of. So we
have a gene and it produces a particular trait
or a group of genes that produce a particular
trait. But with this new, more complex but also
more accurate view of how things work actually. Um
IN what ways do you think we need to
reframe the way we think about the relationship between
genes and traits,
uh, quite profoundly? Um, BUT only in the sense
really of making it more explicit in public, um,
what geneticists have pretty much always realized, you know,
because we've known for a long time that for
one thing in general, a particular gene isn't in,
uh, isn't involved in just a single trait. It
often turns out to be involved in many different
aspects of our physiology. And that's one of the
things that makes, you know, investigating genes so complicated.
And in fact, if that was one of the
things that triggered me decades ago to start thinking,
you know, in these terms about whether we've got
the right narrative because I, when I was working
as an editor of Nature in the 19 nineties,
um the biological editors would come to our editorial
meetings and they would say things like, you know,
I've got this paper that there, you know, um
that we're gonna publish that is, um, say, looking
at this particular gene that we thought was involved
in. Uh I, I don't know, pregnancy or something
and it turns out that actually it's involved in
something entirely different as well. And no one really
seemed to have any idea of what this meant,
you know, why genes have all these different um
strings to their bow. And if we take a
particular trait, we don't, we can't in general trace
it back to a single gene. We find that
it's, there are many genes involved and in some
cases, if we look at something like how tall
we are, there's clearly a strong genetic component to
that, but it's spread over hundreds, maybe thousands of
genes. Now, we only have 20,000 protein coding genes
or maybe even slightly fewer in our bodies. So,
you know, if you've got a trait that involves
1000 or a few 1000 genes, kind of uh
most of the, the, the protein coding genome or
sorry, that's a significant proportion of it. And sometimes
it really is most of it. So, II I,
what that seems to be saying is that there
are some traits that are kind of genome wide,
uh you know, they're, they're, they're influenced a, at
a genome wide level. And some, um uh some
researchers are talking now of uh uh a notion
of omni GIC of traits that seem to involve
pretty much all our genes or, you know, a
huge problem portion of them, some being more important
than others. But most uh genes, pretty much all
the genes having only a tiny, tiny, little influence
themselves. You know, in the sense that you see
variations in the trait and variations in the, in
the sequence of that genome. But they account for
hardly any of the, the, the actual variants by
themselves. So, you know, what, what that, that, that's
really what we want to, to, to what we
need to, to get across. And as I say,
that's something that's kind of always been recognized by
geneticists. And yet somehow this kind of notion has
grown up that there is a gene for this
and a gene, you know, a gene for this
trait, a gene for that trait, a gene for,
I don't know, boldness, a gene for, um, you
know, criminality or something. And we saw endless headlines
like this in the 19 nineties and you still
see them now and we seem to love this
story in the media because it's a simple story
to tell. Ah, we found the gene four X.
Um And you know, iii, I slightly feel that
geneticists now they, they kind of tear their hair
out every time, you know, one of these stories
comes up because they know that's not the real
picture. And yet there seems to be a reluctance
uh uh in the community to ask. Well, why
did, why do we have this picture then? Who
is it that has allowed this picture to develop?
And I do think that geneticist and genetics generally
uh is, is at least partly culpable for the
fact that we have got that simplistic picture. So,
you know, we need a different story to tell.
And I think that uh once we recognize that
genes are resources that cells use for doing various
things and resources that can do many different things.
Um YOU know, that are very, that are useful
in many different ways. That is a better way
to understand genes. So there are, for example, genes
involved in our development, um, that just keep turning
up again and again in, you know, a gene
that is involved in the development of our fingers
might turn up in also the development of our
lungs or, or, you know, something like this. There's
a relatively small set of key developmental genes that
seem to kind of somehow between themselves, do all
seemingly almost everything in development. So, you know, they're,
they're not genes for making a heart or making
a lung or whatever, they're genes gen general purpose
develop mental genes that our cells and our tissues
are able to make use of in different contexts
to do different jobs. So I think that it's
a, it's a harder story to tell about what
genes are. You know, I if we think of
it this way, but that's why I think this
notion of resources that are used by a higher
level of the biological hierarchy that is a more
accurate picture of what they do.
Mhm And o of course, we don't have time
to get into all the details here, but people
of course can read your book and learn more
about it. But the ways by which, as we
said earlier, the same gene can produce different pro
proteins in different contexts. I mean, people also have
to understand that first of all genes in different
kinds of cells can be active or silent and
then they have to be transcribed. We have to
description and they are transcribed into MRN A or
messenger RN A. And then after that, uh there's
pro post transcription processes that can alter that MRN
A before it goes into the ribosome to then
uh uh I mean, get match to a particular
kind of TRN A and then produce the protein.
So, I mean, it's not that we have, we
have a particular gene that gets transcribed and it
goes directly connected to a particular kind of protein
produced in the ribosome.
No, no. Well, that's right. That's um you know,
as I mentioned that uh you know, a single
gene in general can make several different proteins depending
on the context and the way that happens um
is that, and this was discovered in the 19
seventies and it was a total, it came out
of nowhere and people were astonished by it to
begin with that. Um The sequence of uh sort
of chemical letters in DNA is not the same
as the sequence of uh chemical letters in proteins
that actually there are parts missing. Um And uh
people realize that what happens is that the, that
the, so the DNA gets transcribed into the uh
M and the messenger RN A molecule. And then
there's this big sort of assembly of molecules, um
not just proteins, but actually, also some of these
non coding RNAs um that comes along called the
splica zom, which takes the MRN A cuts it
up, throws away some bits um called introns stitches
together in various ways, the, the other bits called
exons. And that makes the template on which the
protein is made. And so splica Zoe is really,
if you like making the choice which protein you're
gonna make from a given MRN A, you know,
the, the the primary sort of transcript in, in
terms of how it stitches it together. And again,
that is contextual information. So it's you, it's integrating
information, you know, of all sorts by bringing together
all these different molecules, these proteins and um uh
and, and R and uh non coding RNAs and
somehow out of that comes this decision. Um So
the more we've understood about that process, how the
splicer zone works, you know, that's uh an aspect
of this contextual um A and Yyy, you know,
that's just one sort of aspect I guess of,
you know, how the DH how the even the
at the level of the individual molecules that get
made in our bodies, you know, how that involves
higher level information. So really what this is um
uh liw you could say, challenging is, it's certainly
challenging. The conventional idea that information flow in biology
is all bottom up from the gene to the
proteins and then somehow sort of magically the proteins,
you know, all the information in the proteins sort
of puts together us. Um It's challenging that it's
saying that information flow is coming in in all
different directions. And that idea that that old idea
is often um sort of thought about in terms
of what Francis Crick called the central dogma of
DNA. And his, um I, I idea was, you
know, it, it was, he was talking about how
information gets from DNA to RN A to proteins.
And, but in a sense, he, it it in
a nutshell, he was saying once the information has
got to the protein, it's, it doesn't get back,
there isn't a backward information flow from proteins to
DNA. You don't get, you know, the protein doesn't
sort of change the nature of, uh, the DNA
itself. So in that sense, it's one dir directional.
Even though within that flow, there can be a
little more complexity than that, that actually, you know,
I think that, that I, if it's carefully stated,
that's a pretty good summary of what actually happens
at that level. There are some people who say,
you know, that there are sort of particular processes
that might challenge that idea. But on the whole,
I think it's AAA fair summary of what happens
between deer DNA and proteins. Um But, uh, as
I say, it, it, the, the fact that the
protein, you know, it is not uniquely determined by
the DNA means that there is actually more information
coming in, it doesn't necessarily get back to DNA,
but it's coming in at different levels of that,
that, uh, that, that, that process and certainly what
it doesn't mean is that this somehow extends to
the whole organism that actually, and this is really
what I think Crick maybe to some extent had
in mind and definitely what James Watson had in
mind when he kind of misstated, uh, repeatedly. Crick's
central dogma. Really. I think wanting to get the
idea across that it's that information flow is all
from the gene up to the organism. And it
is this simple readout process. That's the message that
has tended to sort of come across. And that's
the one that I think is no longer tenable,
given what molecular biology has told us over the
past several decades.
Mhm. Uh And talking about proteins, uh how important
are proteins in life? I mean, because they seem
to be everywhere and seem to participate in, in
every single kind of different function out there. So
how important are they?
Well, uh utterly crucial. I mean, they're, they're extraordinary
molecules. Um So I said that most proteins are
uh are, are enzymes of some sort. So basically
they're proteins are, are strings of amino acids joined
together like beads on a necklace really. And then
in general, the proteins will crumple up in water
into a part in the water of the cell
into a particular shape, a compact shape. Um And
that does its job. Um So the shape that
it forms um in a, in a sense that
determines what the enzyme does. And the traditional idea
was that within that shape, there's uh a AAA
little sort of binding pocket uh with a particular
geometry that fits the molecule that the enzyme is
meant to act on like a lock and key.
And that's really the, the root of the specificity
that proteins have. So our cells are full of
all these different proteins, thousands of different proteins. But
because they have these very particular shapes, they only
recognize their given target and kind of ignore everything
else. That was the traditional idea really. Um One
of the things that I talk about in my
book in relation to proteins, I mean, I should
say that actually, you know what, what I found
was that in looking at all these different levels
of how life works. Uh Pretty much in every
case over the past several decades, we've discovered something
that significantly changes that picture. And one of the
things that does so for proteins is that that
nice, neat idea of this sort of lock and
key idea doesn't seem in general to be the
case that our protein, many of our proteins, perhaps
uh a third, perhaps half, perhaps more don't have
these really, you know, tightly well defined geometric shapes.
They're actually floppy to some degree, they have what
biochemists call disorder. And some of our proteins have
a lot of it. They're really floppy so they're
not like tightly folded, um compact things. They, they've
got all this kind of floppiness and that is
something that protein disorder is something that seems to
be crucial to the way a lot of those
proteins work. One thing it does, it is if
it has this floppiness, then it's no longer. So
particular about which molecules it binds to, it gives
the proteins a kind of fairly generic stickiness and
allow different proteins to stick together. And what it
means is that different proteins can then find novel
parts to stick to. And in that way, they
can um th they, they can perhaps unite two
completely different molecular pathways that you know, responsible or
that are implicated in different processes. And that is
probably one of the things that lies at the
heart of the this poly functionality that genes have
because it's really, you know, it can be a
poly that the gene products the proteins have because
they stick to members of different sort of pathways
and create crosstalk between them and create all this
complexity in the network of interactions that allows information
to be brought in from different sources. And we
find that many of the most important sort of
hub proteins in, in our, in our own uh
protein sort of networks in our own biochemistry are
often ones that will have a fair degree of
disorder. So they're good connectors between different aspects of
our biochemistry. And this is what makes them so,
you know, crucially important. So some of the proteins,
for example, that seem to be um implicated or
their genes are implicated in cancers seem to be,
you know, of this nature, they're somewhat disordered. So
this uh this this notion of protein disorder is,
you know, it's clearly very important for our biochemistry
and what it introduces. And this is just one
way in which this this concept is introduced. What
it introduces is a kind of fuzziness to our
molecular networks. Instead of being these precise chains of
information transfer from this molecule to this molecule to
this molecule, they're a bit fuzzy because the proteins
themselves are a bit promiscuous in what they stick
to. And it seems that this is actually an
essential part of the way we work because there
is more of this fuzziness in us than there
is in bacteria, which is what we were if
you like descended from. So it seems that evolution
has put it there on purpose, there is a
value to it. And I think that the value,
it seems to me the value of it is
that it allows this kind of contextual this kind
of integration of many sources of information that is
essential for an organism, a complex multicellular organism like
us.
And of course, we're talking about genes and proteins.
But in fact, what uh in the brother picture,
what we have in an organism are networks, right?
I mean, the sort of iced sciences like genomics,
transcriptome proteomics atomics because we have networks of genes,
networks of transcription factors, networks of proteins. And then
also networks are trying to understand how different kinds
of molecules in a particular context interact with one
another. Right.
Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And you know that too has
been uh sort of recognized for a long time
that actually a key part of the answer of
how we work is to try to understand these
networks of interaction. But what I wanted to uh
where I wanted to shift that narrative is that
in the past, those networks have tended to be
thought of as a bit like um the the
wiring circuitry in silicon chips. So there are very
precise paths, you know, this network has a very
precise structure and you can sort of see, you
know, in biochemistry textbooks, you sort of see these
diagrams of, you know, these complex networks, but each
molecule kind of speaks to this one or this
one in very particular ways, what I wanted to
get across is that those networks have this fuzz.
And so, you know, I'm not even totally sure
that network is again the right metaphor for thinking
about them because um or at least in general
because, you know, another thing that happens is that,
and this is something we've only discovered in the
past sort of 20 years is that cells make
extensive use of loose collections of, of, of molecules
rather and very particular sort of pairings, you know,
in these networks, they bring together clumps of molecules
of maybe hundreds of different molecules in these sort
of dense kind of liquid like clusters. Or some
of them are liquid, like they're sort of like
gels actually that form in in transient ways in
our cells. So we we, you know, we started
to see because we had the techniques to do
it all these little blobs and sort of speckles
and things forming in our cells. It looks much
more messy than we thought it was. And the
more we understand about those, the more it seems
that actually this is a mechanism that cells use,
that's really a physics based mechanism. It's sort of
analogous to the way um uh vinegar separates from
oil in salad dressing. It really is like in
some cases, at least like a kind of liquid
liquid phase separation, a separation of one liquid phase
from another. So, you know, it's not some precise
structure that where the molecules are joined together in
certain ways, which is what we used to think.
Um It, it's, it's a loose and I talk
about it as a sort of committee of molecules
that are often interacting with many others in, you
know, in these promiscuous ways and yet out of
them. And this is what committees are for they
for making decisions. So out of them comes kind
some kind of decision. So these structures, they're called
biomolecular condensates. And they've been implicated in all kinds
of cell processes, you know, often they're related to
disease. Um, BUT they're certainly implicated in the way
genes are regulated, the way they're switched on and
off. I, you know, I mentioned that there are
many molecules involved. They seem to be involved by
forming of these blobs, sort of BB, basically on
DNA within the cell nucleus that, that through some
kind of molecular, you know, committee decides whether to
turn the gene on or off. So if there
are networks, often they're much more, they're these fuzzy
kind of blobby promiscuous networks rather than wiring diagrams.
Mhm. So, I guess that now is a good
time since we've already talked about genes and proteins
to move one level up and talk about the
cell. So, uh how do you look at the
cell in the broader context of an organism? And
in evolution?
Well, II, I think there's been um well, I
know that there has been an increasing voice in
biology, I think over the past 20 years to
sort of reinstate the cell at the center of
it. Um Some people have even talked about the
rediscovery of the cell, you know, nine, since the
19 fifties, it was all about the gene. And
I think since ironically or perhaps actually not coincidentally
since the completion of the human genome project, uh
around the turn of the millennium, the cell has,
you know, been se sort of returned to center
stage. And I think, you know, that is totally
appropriate because the cell is the minimal living thing
below the level of the cell. Obviously, there are,
you know, things crucial things happening that we need
to understand. But um nothing below that level, I
think is meaningfully alive. The cell is the unit
of, of, of life. So, in some sense, that
is where it needs to start. And again, we
found out things about what cells do and what
they're capable of over the past sort of two
decades or so that used to that really overturn
old ideas about that. And one of the most
uh profound is we found out how in what,
what biologists um scientists generally call how plastic the
cell is, which really means how uh able it
is to switch the state that it's in. So
the the old story was that our cells, you
know, we developed from a single celled embryo from
a fertilized egg and uh to begin with, those
cells are said to be pluripotent. They're sort of
like stem cells, they can make any tissue type
in the body. And gradually as the cells multiply,
they get more and more specialized in different regions
to become particular tissue types and ultimately to become
particular organs uh to make the, the whole organism.
And that's absolutely, you know, true. That's the way
things happen. Um We now see how, actually how
contextual that is, uh we have be better ways
of, of following that developmental process. And we can
see that cells sometimes, you know, they seem to
be following one path and then they kind of
switch and you know, t turn into a different
tissue type because of the messages they've received from
the cells around them. So again, just as molecules
are like committees, making decisions, so are cells, they're,
they're responding to all their, their neighbors in terms
of deciding what kind of cell they're going to
become, which is to say what the daughter cells
when cells divide, you know what sorts of cells
they will be. Um And the thing that we
have uh discovered uh this was really in 2,
2006, 2, 2005, 2006, 2007 was um that, that
process, which used to be thought of as unidirectional
from stem cell like states to mature tissues where
the cells are, you know, skin cells or whatever,
that actually is reversible, we can reverse the state
of even of, of uh skin cells and turn
them back into a stem cell like state. Um
That was that, that abs uh absolutely amazed uh
biologists, even though there were some reasons to think
there might be this sort of plastic plasticity from
older work. The, the really the ease with which
that can be done. Basically, you have to just
give um uh skin cells. Uh A few, you,
you use a virus to um bring, bring into
it some genes that are known to be active
in stem cells. The reason I'm actually uh attacking
my uh when I'm talking about this is that
I've had this done to my own skin cells
taken from my shoulder, which were turned by these
techniques into a stem cell like state and then
grown into neurons. So skin into neurons, it just
it's it was the most astonishing thing. And then
those neurons start to organize themselves into things that
look a little bit like brain like structures. Because
cells seem to have that intrinsic knowledge of, you
know, once they become particular types of cell, they
have if you like some intrinsic knowledge of how
that kind of type of cell needs to be
arranged and organized in the tissue in question. And
so, you know, the skin cells that would form
sheets of skin um once they've been reprogrammed, and
this is the terminology that's used to, to be
neurons, they start to create neuron like structures which
look more like brain like neural neural networks. So,
you know, this overturned our our notion of what
cells can do. And the the the the whole
sort of business of understanding how cells II I
it's called um how, how cells acquire their fate
if you like, which sounds a bit doomy. But
actually, it just means what amount of tissue they,
they, they, they make th this this uh process
of fate selection by cells and how that involves
genes and how that involves, you know, integrating information
from around it as well. In order to make
that decision, that's another area that has really just
boomed in recent times and in ways that are
fantastically useful. Because if we can control sulfates and
if we can grow cells into different tissue types,
there are all sorts of possibilities for regenerative medicine
and for tissue engineering. And we're starting to see
some of those possibilities realized in medicine. So this
is not just uh an aspect of, you know,
fundamentally understanding how we come into being, it's also
something that has real medical applications.
So when earlier you said that you think of
the cell as the unit of life, does that
mean that you also think about it as the
unit of selection in evolution or not? And, and
I mean, of course, uh I'm not trying to
commit you to any particular kind of, of uh
level of selection here, you can be, you can
come from the paradigm of multilevel selection and perhaps
we can also come back to that when after
we talk about tissues, organs and bodies. But uh
does the uh are you, are, were you trying
to imply that or not?
No, I wasn't trying to imply that. And in
fact, to be honest, I was trying to duck
that question. Um I have, you know, the book
ends. Um There's a sort of box section of
text right at the end of the book which
says, uh which asks what does all of this
stuff mean for evolution. Um And I'd, uh although
I, I've had to talk about evolutionary processes at
various times throughout the book, um I was kind
of putting that broad question to one side for
two reasons. Um One is that I don't think
anyone knows the answer to that yet, quite what
the implications are for evolution of these, um you
know, more complex uh narratives and more complex ideas
about the way we work. But certainly the second
reason was that I know just enough about evolutionary
theory to uh to, to know how little I
know. Um AND I, and to, and to know
how complex and subtle these evolutionary questions are. And
so I it's uh to, to understand what these
ideas mean for evolutionary theory, it's, it would require
an another entire book and it's a book that
certainly at this stage anyway, it could not be
written by me because I don't feel I have
the, the knowledge to do so. So there is
this big debate that's been going on for, you
know, decades about what is the level of uh
of which selection happens. And, you know, it's clearly
complicated in the sense that ultimately selection for organisms
happens at the level of the whole organism, the
whole organism, you know, either thrives or dies or
is killed or whatever. So, you know, it happens
at that level. Um But what that means clearly
is that if it dies, it's genes that, which
is to say the particular variants of it that
are in its genome don't get passed on to
progeny if it hasn't yet had any. So, you
know, that's the whole basis of natural selection, right?
And uh a and clearly, as I say, because
genes do have this privileged status, they're the thing
that gets passed on to progeny. Um YOU know,
the a a at that, that's why the, the
traditional idea is that selection happens at the level
of the gene. And there have been, I mean,
all kinds of arguments um from people who know
far more about evolutionary theory than I do over
the years of whether that's the whole story or
whether there can be s selection at other levels
in biology. And particularly there was a, a, you
know, a big argument between Richard Dawkins and um
Eo Wilson about the idea of group selection of
whether selection happens, not just at the level of
individual organisms, but there are things that, you know,
are good for the group uh that are sort
of transferred in the genome. And um A a
and yy, you know, II I think um the
fact that those arguments are happening is a reflection
of how subtle these questions are and they're not
resolved yet. Um So that's really all I felt
I could say about uh the implications for evolutionary
biology to recognize that there are these uh uh
these still open questions and that I think it's
for others who know more about the subject than
me to try to integrate them into this new
picture of how life works.
Fair enough. So, uh let me ask you now
a little bit about tissues, organs and bodies. So
how does uh a cell know uh that I
it should grow that it should replicate and when
to stop? Because this is also very relevant, for
example, to um things like understanding how t tumors
and cancers grow because that's basically uh it starts
from one single cell uh not being able to
stop replicating. Right.
Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Well, I mean, the answer to
that question is one of the reasons why I
think um it, it, it doesn't really make any
sense in developmental terms to think of uh our
development as a simple read out from the genome
because those decisions, they're clearly crucial. You know, how
does an organ, an organ know when to stop
our organs grow to a certain size and then
they stop, how do they know that it's not
programmed um into the, you know, they no gene
that is kind of suddenly kicks in and you
know, stops that process at a certain stage. It's
a again, it's contextual information made at the level
of the tissue. So one way in which, for
example, that ha it's really about how cells communicate
with one another to know what they're up to.
That's really, you know, that I think that's the
right way to kind of think about it. Um,
THEY have to know, you know, how, what, what,
what are the ne, how many neighbors have I
got, you know, how big has this whole sort
of tissue got? And um they communicate in general
in three ways. One is chemical, they send out
things like hormones that, you know, get sort of
plug into uh proteins at the surface of other
cells and create signals that go down to the
genome and and so forth. Um One is uh
um electrical. So all cells not just uh neurons,
but actually all cells um in general have the
potential for making electrical connections with others that kind
of sense the gradients in, in voltage really and
potential across cell membranes. And you know, that seems
to be AAA control mechanism. Um AND one of
the most crucial is mechanical. So cells, you know,
if you, if you actually, if you just sort
of tug on a cell, you can change its
cell fate, you can change the kind of cell
that it will turn into. If you tug on
a stem cell. And that's why if you grow
stem cells on a soft surface, they might develop
in a different direction than if you grow them
on a hard surface cos they're responding to the,
the, the tensions created by adhesion to those different
Surfas. So they respond to mechanical uh signals. And
so, for example, that's how it is that if
a um a fetus is growing with some kind
of, let's say some kind of developmental defect, that
means maybe a limb is shorter than uh you
know, it, it might, than it might normally be.
Um IT'S kind of, you know, when we think
about, when you think about it, you think, well,
how does, how do all the different tissues of
that limb know to stop growing? You know, if
your, if your bone isn't growing enough. Ok. That's
one thing. But then why do all the other
tissues respond? Well, one way it happens is that
the um the, as the skin is growing, the,
the cells are sensing the tension in that skin.
And you know, if the skin has become too
taut, then uh the um the, the cells know
they need to c continue proliferating and release that
tension. If it's become too loose, then they will
stop growing. So there's that mechanical sensing that happens
at the tissue level that is determining things like
the overall morphology of the organism. And that I
don't see that as you know, in any meaningful
sense encoded in the, in, in the genome because
it's entirely contextual, it depends on what the other
things around it are doing and sometimes it might
depend on environmental signals outside the whole organism. Um
So, y you know, th th this is another
sort of uh reflection of how at each level
of the biological hierarchy, there are rules that are
governing the, the growth and the morphology that are
drawing on uh gene resources and they're perhaps feeding
back to genetic resources. So that, you know, the
cells stopping growing means that there's something happening at
the level of the genome. But that are actually
using informa contextual information from the environment rather than
simply following a program.
OK. But i it's one thing for cells and
tissues to know when to grow, for cells, to
know when to replicate or when to stop replicating.
But uh how is it that or why is
it that organs have particular kinds of shapes and
also bodies have particular kinds of shapes? I mean,
uh how do we go from uh cells to
tissues and then to particular kinds of shapes of
organs and entire organism? Yeah.
Well, I mean that uh really that question is
the whole of developmental biology, which is, you know,
a huge field and still unfolding. And we don't
understand the answers to all those questions, but we
do, yeah, we do have answers in some specific
cases. So, um for example, if we think about
the, how the the lung grows, um It's a
branching process. Um And one that has lots of
similarity, not just in terms of how the thing
looks, but perhaps in terms of the basic physics
of that process with the growth of a tree
or the growth of a river network, the, you
know, the branches grow and then they maybe split
and they, you know, they grow off and they
split again and it's a, that's a sort of
complex process, a sort of um feedback process really.
So, for example, you know, the same is true
of our uh uh the our system of blood
vessels. Um AND that's really about um at the
level, at the finest level of capillaries. Um THAT'S
contingent. It's like the way I was talking about
our brain wires up, there's nothing programmed in that.
It's cells making decisions on the hoof about what's
needed. And the way that happens is that if
a tissue doesn't have an adequate uh blood supply,
so there are no nearby capillaries and it's not
getting oxygen, these cells kind of send out a
distress signal, a chemical distress signal, they change their
state to into this uh this state that is,
you know, creating this signal. And it's basically a
signal that tells the um the blood vessel forming
cells come over here and they will uh you
know, they'll start to proliferate and um you know,
towards that region of oxygen depletion and create a
new uh blood vessel that way. So it's entirely
sort of contingent. And y you know, it's, it's,
it's, it's kind of improvising, I suppose as it
goes. Um But then there are other uh developmental
processes that are more uh the, the, the more
you could say, more deterministic in that you, they
will turn out a certain way unless something goes
wrong, you know, uh in general, we all have
five fingers, for example, you know, but there is
no gene that prescribes that there is no gene
for the five of our fingers or toes. The
way that process works um is uh and this
is a, a, you know, a beautiful example of
the kind of a one of those processes that
happen at that developmental level that we now think
that um it's related to AAA process that was
first um talked about theoretically by the, the mathematician
Alan Turing in the 19 fifties. Um WHERE turing
showed that it hh how it's possible when he
was interested in. He, he asked this question because
he was interested in development too. Um He, he
showed that it was possible for particular mixtures of
different chemical agents if they have particular properties of
how they react with themselves and with each other,
um in some circumstances, you can start off with
a totally uniform uh mixture of them and they
will spontaneously separate into regions with different concentrations of
the different amounts. So into a kind of patchiness
and the generic form that tend to arise from
that so called tearing process are spots and stripes.
Um So like sort of zebra stripe type patterns
or, you know, random more or less randomly sort
of uh positioned spots. And we see both of
those processes in biology and it seems that this
tearing process is really used by biology. So the
spotlight processes you can see in the hair fo
in our hair follicles, uh for example, that, um
you know, the little pores and the follicles that,
that uh that, that make the hairs, they're, they're
like these sort of spotty patterns. And we think
that that seems to be a turing like process,
our fingers are stripes, they're turing stripes. So as
the lim bud develops, it starts off as a
sort of paddle, um you know, an undifferentiated paddle,
but there is a uh an interaction between some
of these developmental proteins that I talked about earlier
on that causes uh the, the, the appearance of
stripes within which g bone forming uh genes are
switched on. So you start to get the bones
forming and then in the tissue in between um
the cells die away and you know, the, the
and you, you, that's why there's, there's nothing there.
And that's why sometimes if that doesn't happen fully,
you get sort of webbed skin, you know, that
uh sometimes happens between f fingers or, or, or,
or, or toes. So, you know, that's uh uh
that's how that process it's work is working, it's
drawing again on the on genetically encoded developmental proteins,
but they're proteins that do all sorts of other
things as well. And the actual process that is
creating this structure is one that it's a higher
level uh process that's kind of self organizing itself
into these structures.
So earlier in our conversation, we talked about uh
words and things like meaning, purpose goals. But I
think that we left out of that discussion or
we saved for later uh uh discussion surrounding the
term agent or, and what agency means. So what
is an agent i in biological terms? And I
mean, at what level can we see uh agency?
I mean, can, for example, a single celled organism
already be an agent or does it need to
be more complex than that?
Well, again, it a word that doesn't have any
generally agreed meaning and it certainly differs in meaning
across different scientific disciplines. So there are uh some,
I guess maybe in psychology who, who, who, who
would uh only recognize agency as something that involves
intention and uh that involves, you know, uh sort
of conscious cognition that's, you know, an expression of
our human agency. Um Within engineering, there is a
uh uh uh can be a meaning of agency
that doesn't necessarily correlate with the one in biology.
So it depends who you ask. But the way
I talk about it in the book and the
way that I think is perhaps um it feels
the most meaningful way to think about it in
biology is um agency is the ability of some
entity of an organism basically to um well, it's
the ability of an agent. Let's leave it general
like that to um uh to set itself goals,
to have self determined goals and to manipulate its
environment and perhaps itself in order to attain those
goals, an entity that can do that is an
agent.
Uh But, but then uh it, it, that sort
of entity could be a single celled organism.
I think so. Yes, I would abso well, in
fact, I would absolutely say it can be that
um you know, there's plenty of good reasons now,
good experimental evidence to, to, to, to see that
single cells, bacteria or even, you know, single cells,
Varian tissues have a kind of agency for, for
example, you can in, in cell cultures of, you
know, bac bacterial cells or our own cells, they
are nominally, you can grow them. Um YOU know,
so that they're nominally identical cells, they're, they're genetically
identical, they've had the same kind of history, you
know, as far as you can tell. And yet
you can provide those cells with some kind of
stimulus, maybe heat or maybe some chemical and they
won't all respond in the same way. Um BECAUSE
there are maybe just, you know, sort of random
uh or maybe non random because of where they
are in the colony differences that have arisen between
them, that have created differences in the internal state
of those cells, which mole, which genes they're expressing,
which molecules they are making. Um And those are
uh it, it, it, and that internal state is
an aspect of the decision that each cell makes
in order to, you know, to, about responding to
this stimulus. So that's a characteristic of agents that
they're not just sort of autonomous, that automatically give
them a ST a particular stimulus and they'll respond
in a certain way. You know, there's a, a
degree to which that is true, certainly for single
cells. But we know that it's not always true
that it depends also on the internal state of
the agent. And this is one of the, I
mean, in you mentioned Kevin Mitchell's book um o
on Agency and he, Kevin has a nice um
I, in fact, it's, it's work that he did
with uh uh his student, Henry Potter where they
have a, a nice um breakdown of characteristics that
agents have. And this dependence on internal states is
one of them. And what that tells you is
that an agent has to have some internal complexity
in order to really qualify as an agent. And
that's why a gene can't because it simply doesn't.
And a protein really doesn't. There are some proteins
that are sort of big enough and complex enough
that, you know, you start to i it's meaningful
to ask that question, are they starting to show
some sort of agency? But in general, you only
will find that in something that has the internal
complexity of something like a cell. So that's where
I again, where I feel agency as well as
actual life really begins.
So in your book, at a certain point, you
also talk about and comment on medical approaches to
biology. So could you tell us a little bit
about that? And when it comes to the sort
of paradigm that is the most dominant nowadays in
medicine, what do you think about it?
Well, I think one of the me messages for
medicine that might come out of uh the kinds
of things I consider in the book is because
of these um this hierarchy of, of, of, of
levels in the way life works, each of which
has some degree of autonomy, some degree of independence
from the details of what's happening at the lower
levels. What that really means is there's a um
the, the causation what is really causing if you
like, um you know, if you're thinking about the,
the, the, the shape, the structure, the behavior of
the whole system, what is really causing that it
might arise at several, many perhaps any of those
levels. It's not a cause that's all determined at
the genetic level. Some things are. And if we're
thinking now about disease, if we think about something
like cystic fibrosis, um you know, there is a
particular gene where there are several uh mutant varieties
of that gene that some people inherit. And, you
know, if you have them, then you ha are,
are likely to get cystic fibrosis. Um Not actually
completely, you know, it doesn't, it doesn't necessarily do
you to having that. It depends, there's still some
dependence on higher levels that can compensate. But, you
know, if you have cystic fibrosis, you pretty much
certainly have one of these gene variants. Um So
in that case, it's meaningful to, I think of
that gene as being a, a real cause of
the disease. But many other diseases, you know, because
I talked about the, the, the way that our
traits are spread throughout the genome. So the common,
you know, the most common diseases that we face
things like, you know, heart disease, um and or
cardiovascular problems, generally, um obesity, diabetes, um they, you
know, they're spread throughout the genome. And so causation
can't in any meaningful sense, certainly be ascribed to
a single gene. But I think it can't really
be ascribed to the, the genome itself. It's things
that are happening at the physiological level that, you
know, are being um affected by, by genetics. But
the causation is perhaps happening at a, at a
higher level. If we think about COVID, for example,
the, the people who had serious reactions to a
CO uh to an infection by the COVID virus.
And, you know, the PE many of the people
who died from it, um, that the, the, the,
the problem there was how their immune system was
responding, that it was a sort of a often
an over response of the immune system that caused
all kinds of, um, problems with tissues. Um, uh
ALL kinds of respiratory problems. Um, IT seems that
there is, you know, that there is a genetic
aspect to that propensity and we're only starting to
uncover that now. But really the causative um uh
level of the problem there was at the level
of the immune system. And so that was where,
you know, often we, we uh tried to intervene
that some of the drugs that were most useful
were anti inflammatories that calmed down the immune system.
And this is the general message then the of,
of the book that really if we have this
multilevel causation in biology, if we're wanting to put
something right, that has gone wrong at the level
of the organism, at the level of the body,
then it makes sense to try to identify, you
know, where is th th the primary causation arising
for this particular condition? Um So the, the predominant
idea, you know, over, over since the certainly it
was the human genome project was partly predicated on
this. Once we understand the genome, we'll be able
to figure out which genes are responsible for pretty
much any disease. And we can go in and
do you know, do something about it. But if
causation is not rooted in the genes, that's not
gonna be very useful. And that's, you know, we've
seen that, uh, it's, the genome project has been
fantastically useful as a resource for all sorts of
reasons. Um, PARTICULARLY for identifying people who might have
a genetic propensity or vulnerability to disease. But it
has produced really very few actual cures because that's,
you know, perhaps not the, the level at which
cure will be, will, will be found. So uh
um that, you know, that's that, that's really um
the, the, the general message that and, and I
think that's particularly been been uh notable in cancer.
And there are many people now saying we've had
years of, you know, ID, the of, of this
notion that we identify the cancer genes and that
allow us to stop cancer and it hasn't worked
and maybe we need to rethink it. And perhaps
part of that rethinking is to think about cancer
more at the systemic level, more at perhaps the
level of a dysfunction of cells or even of
tissues rather than of genes.
So if I understand it correctly, then the main
proposal here for uh doctors for researchers in medicine
would be for them to reframe the way they
think about causation in disease or
not. Iii I think so. And I, you know,
I wouldn't want to claim that this is some
bold idea that I've come up with that I
sort of me to say that they, um, I
think that this is something that actually, um, people
are expressing more and more, you know, anyway, I
mean, as I say, in particular, in the case
of cancer where the, you know, genetic approaches have
been really frankly so disappointing. I mean, you know,
I talked earlier about having had cancer myself, prostate
cancer, um, recently and it's a stark reminder of
how we actually generally deal with cancer still, which
is, you know, high tech medieval really that it's,
um, in my, you know, a robot goes in
and performs surgery, it cuts out the bit that
has the cancer in. And, you know, it's fantastic
that it, that it works, it can work and
that, you know, it worked in my case. Um,
BUT, you know, that's still the level that we're
at, we just cut it out or we pump
ourselves full of, you know, toxic stuff and hope
that it kills the cancer cells faster than it
kills all our heal healthy cells. So we still,
uh, you know, generally relying on these crude methods
rather than anything, you know, finely sort of targeted
at particular genes. Um So I think we're already
discovering, you know, we're already realizing that that actually
that we, we, you know, we need to take
this broader view of medicine than just sort of
thinking that you can address everything at the genetic
level. And, you know, again, thinking about cancer. The
immune system seems to be a conduit for all
kinds of, it's hardly a disease that we know
of that doesn't involve the immune system in some
way. And it's really striking that the immune system
is now one of the areas that we're targeting
for dealing with cancer, uh, you know, immunotherapy, um,
is very, uh, uh, uh, effective for particular types
of cancer. It doesn't work by any means for
all cancers. But for some, it seems to show
a great deal of promise to sort of supercharge
our immune system to, to deal with the cancer.
Um So in a, in a way that's kind
of helping the body at the right level to
deal um with the problem itself rather than us
kind of going in there and trying to do
microsurgery on genes.
But, but going back to when we talked about
our context is so important to understand how life
works. In the case of, for example, uh breathing
and treating cancers, don't you think that perhaps we
should need more personalized medicine here? Because it's not
just that every cancer is different from the others.
But also I would imagine that in different people,
even the same type of cancer would be different.
Right? Yeah, absolutely. And I, you know, I think
that, that um that's the kind of personalized medicine
that I think really does hold a lot of
promise. Um BECAUSE a, as you say, um it's
now recognized because we have the techniques to look
in detail at cancers. It's now recognized that in
a sense, every cancer is individual and it's not
just um you know, uh uh uh cells proliferating
sort of wildly and indiscriminately actually, a lot of
tumors look more like. Uh uh I, I um
quoted in the book, I think um that it's
like a deranged development that actually they're, they have
different types of cell within the tumor, different types
of cancer cell that look like, you know, they,
they're differentiating in much the same way that they
do in, in normal development. Um And you know,
to, to, I, if we understand what different types
of cell are in a particular tumor, we can
then uh quite possibly target that tumor with the
right kind of treatment, the right kind of drugs
for that particular tumor. And even as you say,
in, in a single person, you know, one tumor
might not be the same as, as another. So,
ab absolutely. And I think, you know, that's one
area where being able to um genetically uh analyze
the cells that are in a tumor is absolutely
valuable that tells you that's really valuable information for
the types of cell it is and the types
of treatment that it might respond to. Um And
I think it's, it's, it's very striking that, you
know what a lot of people who've talk, who
are talking about personalized medicine. Now, we, we've got
this idea. Uh I think often sort of pushed
to us. So what that means is we'll have
our genomes profiled and then our genomes will tell
us what, you know, treatments are best for us,
that there might be some degree that that will
happen. But I think people generally now in personalized
medicine recognize this hierarchy of levels. And that actually
what we also need to do is to be
profiling ourselves at the tissue level, at the cell
level, at the physiological level. Um TO understand, you
know, what treatment is going to be best for
the individual. So, personalized medicine is coming round to
this a kind of holistic picture. I think of
understanding the b you know, biology, understanding how life
works at all these different levels so that we
can best understand how to, how to intervene for
an individual.
So one last topic then toward the end of
your book, you go beyond talking about how life
works and you also talk about redesigning life. So
as we accumulate knowledge about how life works, what
do you think would be some of the main
ways we could redesign life?
Well, I I've talked uh touched on one of
them already, which is this notion of cell reprogramming
for, you know, tissue regener regeneration. And uh one
way in which that's developing is that I, you
know, I said when I had my uh skin
cells reprogrammed to neurons, they started making something that
looked a little bit like a sort of brain
like structure. That's a structure called an organoid. So
it's grown in a dish and you know, it
starts to in some crude way to resemble a
sort of embryonic brain. If you program the reprogram,
the cells not to become neurons, but uh to
become some other tissue type, then they start to
assemble into structures that look a bit like the
respective organ. If you program them to become like
the epithelium of the gut, they start to make,
you know, a tube like gut like structure with
all these little sort of protrusions that we have
in our gut. Um You know, if you make
them into uh uh pancreatic cells, they will start
to become like a little pancreas. Um So uh
these uh so called organoids, they can be used.
Um They can be used as models to understand
uh um to, to, to, you know, as to,
to fundamentally investigate um the the the structure and
the properties and how these organs will respond to
particular treatments. So they can help us understand the
development process in a dish. Um But you know,
they can also be potentially grown into structures that
could be used to, to that could be re
implanted in the body. So people are interested in,
for example, repairing neural damage by growing neural structures
in a dish and then perhaps re implanting that
neural tissue into the body or or you know,
doing that with muscle or whatever. And there are,
you know, approaches that are starting to uh to,
to pay off um in this way, or we
can, in some cases, we can think about reprogramming
cells directly within the body rather than having to
take them out and grow them in a dish.
There are complications to that process, but in some
ways that can be, there are also advantages, you
know, you you want, if you're regrowing neural tissue,
you want it to be integrated into the neurons
that are already there, which can happen much more
easily if it's growing in city rather than grown
in addition, and sort of grafted back in. So,
you know, those sorts of possibilities are, are really
um extraordinary for regenerative medicine. But beyond that, I
think once we uh uh uh start to, to,
to recognize how the developmental process really goes on
and how cells acquire fate and communicate with each
other, it opens up questions that almost seem verging
on the philosophical of, well, what does that mean
about the, the, the the range of different morphologies
that the human body could have or that tissues
generally could have? You can ask questions like well,
could there be states that cells could form because
they're, you know, these incredibly complex systems with, you
know, thousands of different proteins, but they only form
a limited number of tissues in our body. It
seems unlikely that those are the only things cells
could form. Could there be tissue types that have
not, that don't appear in our body? But that
could actually be useful. Could actually, you know, do
something. Um Could they grow into d could we
program cells to grow into different shapes? Can we
understand these, these developmental processes? Well enough that we
can make not just a uh a little organoid
but actually a group of different organoids that, you
know, start communicating with one another like a system
of organs. I mean, you know, once you start
thinking about down this line, the possibilities become mind
boggling and also potentially grotesque, you know, could you
grow a kind of new sort of organ or
mini uh sorry new organism or mini organism where,
you know, several of these organoids have kind of
wired up. We've already um researchers have already been
able to wire up a brain organoid to a,
a bit of muscle tissue so that the um
the br the signals from the brain can make
the muscle do things. Um You know, how far
along those uh lines can we go? What are
the ethical considerations about that in particular? And you
know, the particularly when you're thinking about growing brain
organoids, the more brain like they become the better
model they are for understanding how the real brain
works and the bigger they become the better model
they are. But also the more you have to
then start thinking, is there some point if we're
growing them from human cells, some point at which
we have to start thinking, could this thing be
conscious? What does that mean? What does it mean
for a bit of, you know, isolated brain, like
tissue outside the body to have consciousness? Could it
in any sense have feeling? We don't know the
answer to these questions, but we absolutely have to
ask them once we start growing these things. So
yeah, in terms of being able to understand and
control and direct developmental processes, um including ones outside
the body, you know, incredible possibilities. Um Open up
for growing new kinds of, you know, living mechanism
or, you know, p possibly new kinds of, you
know, organ. Um But with them come some really
quite tricky ethical uh and also philosophical questions.
And I would imagine that particularly if in the
future, we accumulate enough knowledge to be able to
create completely new life forms that that could also
raise some ethical questions. Like for example, if we
were to create a new life form that is
sentient, then how would we treat it? How would
we deal with it in what ways would we
use it if that was the case? And also
if it was something that we would then be
releasing into a particular ecosystem, then we should also
care about how it would interact with other kinds
of organisms there. It could disrupt the ecosystem.
Absolutely. Yes. Well, this is already, these are already
the sorts of questions that people working in synthetic
biology, you know, have to uh understand and in
general this idea of synthetic biology of redesigning living
organisms for particular purposes in general, that's been confined
to doing things to bacteria because bacteria are simpler
than us, they're more predictable than us. You know,
you can insert particular genes into them and we've
actually been doing this since the 19 seventies to
get them to make particular chemicals or to, you
know, alter the ways they, they behave in, in
quite well defined ways. And there can be fantastic
uses for this for making new sort of biomaterials
and so on or perhaps even, you know, programming
bacteria to a to be environmental remediators to, you
know, eat up lots of pollution or something. But
if you do, even at that level, you know,
you have to start thinking, well, what, what are
the implications of releasing something engineered like this into
the natural environment where it can potentially evolve? Um
But once you start to think about multicellular synthetic
biology, which is still relatively new because it's much
harder to do because you then have to think
about more levels of the hierarchy and you know
how we can control them then, yeah, these broader
questions arise and if you're thinking about doing that
with human cells or for example, with perhaps mixtures
of human cells and those of other um animals
or those of other organisms, you know, what, what
is the nature of the entity that you're creating?
Is it uh is it in some sense a
new kind of living entity? What does that mean?
What are the, you know, safety um considerations and
so on? So these kinds of um considerations are
going to become more and more complex. I mean,
one thing, one area that I just also touch
on in the book is that in, in um
understanding Human embryology, we can now create out of
stem cells structures that look in many respects like
human embryos that, that, that have not been created
by any eggs or sperm being involved at all.
They're just taking stem cells and the stem cells
would organize themselves if you do it in the
right way and give them the right sort of
tissues and nutrients. Um They will organize themselves into
something that looks like a human embryo. And that
can be really useful as a kind of whole
embryo organoid, really for understanding development. But of course,
the ethical questions there become even more profound and
you know, should we treat it as we do
human embryo, actual human embryos with the same kind
of, you know, rules governing what can be done?
Or is it a different sort? Is it a,
you know, tissue culture, is it a different sort
of organism? Really? We don't know the answer to
these things, but they're ones that people are now
having to really sort of grapple with.
Mhm. Ok. So let's wrap up the interview here.
The book is again how life works. The user's
guide to the new biology. I'm leaving a link
it in the description down below. And Doctor Ball,
would you like to tell people again where they
can find you when you work on the internet?
Uh Well, yes, I guess you can, I mean,
I have a uh, a AAA website which I
guess you can put up Ricardo www dot Flip
o.co.uk. Um, Google Me and you'll probably find me.
And, yeah, a full list of my books is
on that, on that website.
By the way, could we expect a new book
somewhere in the future or?
Uh, YES, inevitably, I guess, um, I'm not gonna
say too much about the, um, I, I have
to admit rather guiltily I'm working on in one
way or another on three books at the moment.
Um, AND I'm not gonna say too much about
them or, uh, except that they're underway for one
which is going to be published, I think. Um,
HOPEFULLY later this year. Um, AND it's an Illustrated
history of alchemy. Um, IT'S, it's working with a
publisher who produces beautiful illustrated books that, that I've
done a couple before with them. They always look
fantastic. And, uh it's so, yes, that's basically what
it's about. It's trying to reposition the way we
think about alchemy as something that's not just, you
know, uh uh some kind of weird superstition but
is actually uh an important part of the history
of science.
Great. So I'm very much looking forward to it
and thank you so much again for taking the
time to come on the show. It's always a
pleasure to talk with you.
Well, it's a pleasure to meet you. Thanks very
much for coming in.
Hi guys. Thank you for watching this interview. Until
the end. If you liked it, please share it.
Leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by the N Lights
learning and development. Then differently check the website at
N lights.com and also please consider supporting the show
on Patreon or paypal. I would also like to
give a huge thank you to my main patrons
and paypal supporters, Perera Larson, Jerry Muller and Frederick
Suno, Bernard Seche O of Alex Adam Castle Matthew
Whitten B are no wolf, Tim. Ho Erica LJ
Conners, Philip Forrest Connolly. Then the Met Robert Wine
in NAI Z Mark Nevs calling Hol Brookfield, Governor
Mikel Stormer Samuel Andre Francis for Agns Ferg and
H her meal and Lain Jung Y and the
K Hes Mark Smith J Tom Hummel s friends,
David Sloan Wilson, Ya de ro ro Diego, Jan
Punter, Romani Charlotte, Bli Nicole Barba, Adam Hunt Pavlo
Stassi na me, Gary G Alman Sam of Zed
Y Polton John Barbu J Price Hall, Eden brand
Douglas Fry Franca Beto Lati Cortez or Solis Scott
Zachary FTD and W Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul
Giorgio, Luke Loki, Georgio Theophano, Chris Williams and Peter
Wo David Williams Di Costa Anton Erickson Charles Murray,
Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralie Chevalier, Bangalore Fists, Larry
Dey, Junior, Old Ebon, Starry Michael Bailey then Spur
by Robert Grassy Zorn, Jeff mcmahon, Jake Zul Barnabas
Radick, Mark Kempel, Thomas Dvor Luke Neon, Chris Tory
Kimberley Johnson, Benjamin Gilbert Jessica. No week in the
B brand Nicholas Carlson, Ismael Bensley Man, George Katis
Valentine Steinman, Perras, Kate Van Goler, Alexander Abert Liam
Dan Biar Masoud Ali Mohammadi Perpendicular Jer Urla. Good
enough, Gregory Hastings David Pins of Sean Nelson, Mike
Levin and Jos Net. A special thanks to my
producers is our web, Jim Frank Luca Stina, Tom
Vig and Bernard N Cortes Dixon, Bendik, Muller Thomas
Trumble, Catherine and Patrick Tobin, John Carlman, Negro, Nick
Ortiz and Nick Golden. And to my executive producers
Matthew Lavender, Sergi, Adrian Bogdan Knits and Rosie. Thank
you for all